Anxiety in second generation immigrants

Immigrant parents come to America hoping to give their children a chance at a good life. They rebuild their life in this new country, and work hard to do so. They’ve seen how those around them who didn’t work as hard stumble into oblivion. So they tell their children they must strive high to live the good life.
Only, the children have not seen what their parents have. The children grow up in a different society, with different pressures and expectations. They did not have to rebuild their lives from scratch, so they have the freedom to lollygag, socialize, and drift along the current of the culture they live in. The pressure their parents felt, and needed, to succeed doesn’t quite translate to the tranquility of suburban life. So perhaps the children need not fear the world like their parents did.
If the child acts on acts on this relaxed wavelength, the parents may see the signs of imminent failure materialize. Having witnessed family and friends ruin their lives over not having worked hard enough in their youths, they may see the child's "laziness" as the beginning of their own ruin. Thus, for the good of the child, they may go to great lengths to impress on that poor thing the urgency of the matter - the need to do what they say is right.
Thus, an anxious pattern develops, where the child is taught to believe that what they do is wrong unless it adheres to the model of living provided by their parents. That model, having been developed through the precarious strain of the immigration process, often demands that the children push themselves, constantly, to great extremity to meet its demands. Thus, the child is stuck trying to work their way into the life their parents laid out for them, instead of taking life as it comes and making the best of that.
If this is you, I want you to consider “amor fati,” the love of one’s fate. If you choose to believe that life is worth living, no matter what it looks like, you may find there is a wonderful web of life outside what you were raised to think is acceptable. So go forth, go out of bounds, and discover all it has to offer.