Where Science Fails

Science: The observation, identification, description, experimental investigation, and theoretical explanation of phenomena.

I’m going to expand on this definition and add that the theoretical explanation of phenomena involves eliciting a reproducible, generalizable, rigorously factual conclusion. In other words, science is the process of identifying laws which govern our reality. The utilization and exploitation of these laws has proven incredibly powerful in technological development (obviously), placing science at the center of much of our lives.

In these very same lives, technological development has facilitated globalization and, in turn, the diverse, immigrant-centric culture which dominates urban America. In this world, many are disconnected from the tradition and culture they inherit. They subsequently lose an understanding of life steeped in that culture, leaving them to look too look elsewhere for goals, values, and purpose. They must find something that spans beyond cultures, beyond environments, beyond all physical boundaries unto life itself. Where better to look than science?

Well, as a scientist, one may be inclined to observe common patterns between living beings and attempt to uncover some shared laws governing these behaviors. For example, one common trait between living beings is that they are very determined to stay alive and reproduce. This is practically a universal truth; thus it follows that the goal of an individual should be to stay alive and maximize the quantity and longevity of living matter around them—to maximize the spread of life. This is one understanding I have found among young scientists regarding the purpose of life. 

But there are many situations in which this definition does not serve us well. At a large scale, overpopulation and the depletion of resources would be a great reason to scale back our numbers. At an individual level, not everyone is prepared, financially, mentally, or otherwise, to bring new life into the world; asking that of them would impel them to act in opposition to their own best interest. Quantity of life is important, just not something we should always prioritize.

With the above example, what I want to offer is the idea that a scientific understanding of purpose brings forth the notion of a universal, indubitable answer of how to live. Whether it raises quantity, quality of life, or any other singular understanding of what life ought to be, it is proposed that our best interest is to follow that “objectively correct”, rigorously examined practice of life. It posits that the wisdom and knowledge gained through our individual experience or passed down through culture is “subjective,” untested, and subsequently untrustworthy. We are taught, through this lens, to ignore what our lives and bodies give us in feedback, instruction, and direction. Instead of rewarding people for doing what is best for themselves, we reward conformity to a predetermined notion of what is right. 

This will fail. It has failed. There is no single goal or method which will provide everyone, everywhere, health, happiness, and whatever else we deem desirable. There are diametrically opposed values and methods required to sustain different people in different situations. In the pursuit of a universal form of good, we have forgotten that what is good changes from person to person, ecosystem to ecosystem, moment to moment, and have ravaged all those real forms of good in the process. Let us return to trusting our bodies, minds, elders, and cultural wisdom to understand how we might live. Let us make decisions informed by our own lives and inhabited worlds, as well as a continuous, scientifically informed questioning. Let us let go of any narrative purporting a single, universal, objective form of good. Let us return, instead, to the reality of our lives, and be informed by it, and it alone for how we should live.

An aside for those unsettled: I’m not anti-science. I understand that there is a great power over our world to be derived from scientific practice. The distinction I want to make is that we should inform our use of science with real-world experience, not the other way around.